proposal: TiDB with WebAssembly (#13570)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2019-11-18-tidb-with-wasm.md

    useful for users who want to verify TiDB’s compatibility with MySQL or other SQL database. We need to support 
    it in the browser.
- Migrate the result of stage 1 into phone browsers. Possible problems are:
  - The webkit has a [limit](https://trac.webkit.org/browser/webkit/branches/safari-604.1-branch/Source/JavaScriptCore/jit/ExecutableAllocator.cpp#L90) 
    on executable memory, typically it's 64M. However, the  current Wasm compilation of TiDB  is 76M, which requires 
    some downsizing.
  - The browser in phone has different interaction model  than that  in PC, so the SQL terminal must be compatible 
    with both.
- Migrate the result of stage 1 into Wasmer, and publish it to [WAPM](https://wapm.io/), so that it can run in any 
  platform easily with WAPM, even can run on [WebAssembly shell](https://webassembly.sh/), to archive this, we should 
  solve:
  - Golang doesn’t support WASI now, so we need to use a [fork branch](https://github.com/neelance/go/tree/wasi) 
    of Golang and recompile the toolchain.
  - The result of stage 1 is too large and should be shrinked.

### Solution of compilation problem

> In case of problems of stage 1, incompatibility with WASM can be divided into the following cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In the case of the problem of stage 1, incompatibility with WASM can be divided into the following cases:
```

> - TiDB's own code has platform-dependent code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. TiDB's own code has platform-dependent code.
```
You use "case 1/2/3/4" to refer to these list items below. In this case, it's recommended to make this list an ordered list.

> - TiDB has platform-dependent code in a library that is directly or indirectly imported. This dependent library is controlled by PingCAP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. TiDB has platform-dependent code in a library that is directly or indirectly imported. This dependent library is controlled by PingCAP.
```

> - TiDB has platform-dependent code in a library that is directly imported. This dependent library is not controlled by PingCAP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. TiDB has platform-dependent code in a library that is directly imported. This dependent library is not controlled by PingCAP.
```

> - TiDB has platform-dependent code in a library that is indirectly imported. This dependent library is not controlled by PingCAP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. TiDB has platform-dependent code in a library that is indirectly imported. This dependent library is not controlled by PingCAP.
```

For case 1, we add the Wasm implementation for TiDB directly, according to Golang's platform-related file [naming rules](https://golang.org/pkg/go/build/), 
the file name format is:

- *_GOOS
- *_GOARCH
- *_GOOS_GOARCH

So the only thing we need do is to add *_wasm.go, and mock an implemention based on the implemention for other platforms.

For case 2, the solution is same as case 1, because we can modify the third-party code directly.

For case 3 and case 4, we can’t modify the code directly. There are 3 solutions:

- Open issues for these repos, and ask their owners to support WebAseembly

>   - Advantage: we don’t need do it ourselves, and we can keep up with upstream

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Advantage: we don’t need to do it ourselves, and we can keep up with upstream
```

  - Disadvantage: some repos have been archived, and some are no longer maintained, nobody will reply our issue
- Clone these repos to pingcap org and modify their code, then switch the reference of TiDB to the new repos.
  - Advantage: we can control these code, and modify them any time

>   - Disadvantage: if the dependency chain is long, we should clone very many repos, and we will detach with upstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Disadvantage: if the dependency chain is long, we should clone many repos, and we will detach from upstream.
```

- If TiDB only uses a few functions or symbols of these repos, we can:
  - Create a new package in TiDB

>   - In this package,  implement the functions  required by  Wasm platforms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - In this package, implement the functions required by Wasm platforms
```

>   - In this package,  reexport the third party dependencies for non-Wasm platforms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - In this package, re-export the third party dependencies for non-Wasm platforms
```

  - Modify the TiDB’s reference of the library to the new package, and all code except the new package shouldn’t reference 
    the third-party library.

In summary, when a third-party package does not support WebAssembly, we need to look at  it in different situations. 
The priority can be set as follows:

> - If the third-party package is active, raise an issue; if the author is busy, then create a PR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the third-party package is active, file an issue; if the author is busy, then create a PR
```

- If a third-party package has been archived or is no longer maintained, there are two cases:
  - We rely heavily on it, then clone it and change it ourselves.

>   - We only rely slightly on it  , then we use solution 3 to walk around of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - We only rely slightly on it, then we use solution 3 to walk around it.
```

### Solution of PC browser

> We found that  some specific system functions in Golang will crash if we try to run them in browser:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We found that some specific system functions in Golang will crash if we try to run them in browser:
```

![wasm-run-error-in-browser](./imgs/wasm-run-error-in-browser.png)

As shown in the figure above, when we execute the `os.stat` function, the runtime found that there 
was no such a function in the environment. This situation occurs because Golang does not currently 

> support WASI, so it mock the host interface using the wasm_exec.js file. However, only a few system 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
support WASI, so it mocks the host interface using the wasm_exec.js file. However, only a few system 
```

functions are mocked in this file, and `os.stat` is not among them. The solution is to mount the 
functions we need to the `fs` object on the global object before we execute Wasm.  For example:

```js
function unimplemented(callback) {
    const err = new Error("not implemented");
    err.code = "ENOSYS";
    callback(err);
}
function unimplemented1(_1, callback) { unimplemented(callback); }
function unimplemented2(_1, _2, callback) { unimplemented(callback); }

fs.stat = unimplemented1;
fs.lstat = unimplemented1;
fs.unlink = unimplemented1;
fs.rmdir = unimplemented1;
fs.mkdir = unimplemented2;
go.run(result.instance);
```

Another problem for browser is that TiDB requires to listen to a port to provide service normally, which 
is prohibited by the browser. Therefore, we need to change the way TiDB provides services — embedding a 

> SQL terminal. SQL terminal In the front-end field is very common, and we can  find a ready-made one. The 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL terminal. SQL terminal in the front-end field is very common, and we can find a ready-made one. The 
```

is such a method in TiDB:

```go
// Exec executes a sql statement.
func (tk *TestKit) Exec(sql string, args ...interface{}) (sqlexec.RecordSet, error) {
    var err error
    if tk.Se == nil {
        tk.Se, err = session.CreateSession4Test(tk.store)
        tk.c.Assert(err, check.IsNil)
        id := atomic.AddUint64(&connectionID, 1)
        tk.Se.SetConnectionID(id)
    }
    ctx := context.Background()
    if len(args) == 0 {
        var rss []sqlexec.RecordSet
        rss, err = tk.Se.Execute(ctx, sql)
        if err == nil && len(rss) > 0 {
            return rss[0], nil
        }
        return nil, errors.Trace(err)
    }
    stmtID, _, _, err := tk.Se.PrepareStmt(sql)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.Trace(err)
    }
    params := make([]types.Datum, len(args))
    for i := 0; i < len(params); i++ {
        params[i] = types.NewDatum(args[i])
    }
    rs, err := tk.Se.ExecutePreparedStmt(ctx, stmtID, params)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.Trace(err)
    }
    err = tk.Se.DropPreparedStmt(stmtID)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.Trace(err)
    }
    return rs, nil
}
```

> This Exec function is just what we need. We can modify it slightly and use it in browsers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Exec function is exactly what we need. We can modify it slightly and use it in browsers.
```

The last two problems are that we need to access files and  support SQL operations in batches. These 
two problems can be combined into one problem, because the user executes  SQL in batches in the form 
of files. The only way for a  browser to access a file is to upload and download, so our file access 

> must be converted to file upload/download in browser.. The solution is: detecting the SQL statements 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must be converted to file upload/download in the browser. The solution is: detecting the SQL statements 
```

executed by the user, and requesting the browser to pop the upload window when the user needs to access 
files. Then the user selects a file to upload, and the data of the file is submitted to TiDB for processing.

### The solution to mobile browser adaptation

> Since webkit has restrictions on the executable size in mobile browsers (usually 64M), and our TiDB-WASM 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Since the webkit has restrictions on the executable size in mobile browsers (usually 64 MB), and our TiDB-WASM 
```

> size is about 76M. An exception will occur when we run it in a mobile browser:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
size is about 76 MB. An exception will occur when we run it in a mobile browser:
```

![wasm-mobile-exception](./imgs/wasm-mobile-exception.jpeg)

There are two options to reduce the size of the compiled file:
- Tailor the functionality of TiDB and remove features that are not useful in the browser (such as grpc)
- Looking for a better compilation solution. We may need to find the answer from the Golang compiler.

In addition to the browser's size limit on the Wasm binary file, we also need to solve the SQL terminal 
input problem on the mobile phone. At present, the SQL terminal on  PC browsers has been implemented, 

> but it cannot be used normally  on mobile browsers, which process events differently as PC do. We need to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but it cannot be used normally on mobile browsers, which process events differently as PC does. We need to 
```

adapt the front end for mobile phones.

### Compile to WASI 

> To really run TiDB across platforms, we need to compile TiDB to WASI. The current version of Golang does 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

To run TiDB across platforms, we need to compile TiDB to WASI. The current version of Golang does 
```
